# Week2 Homework

By Deng Yufan.

## P39 T1

Let $\phi : G \rightarrow H$ be a homomorphism.

a. Prove that $\phi(x^n)=\phi(x)^n$ for all $n \in \Z^+$.

b. Do part (a) for $n = -1$ and deduce that $\phi(x^n)=\phi(x)^n$ for all $n \in \Z$.

---

a. Induction n. For $n=1$ it's trivial. Assume $n$ and prove $n+1$.

We have $\phi(x^{n+1})=\phi(x^n * x) = \phi(x^n) \diamond \phi(x) = \phi(x)^n \diamond \phi(x) = \phi(x)^{n+1}$.

b. We have $\phi(x) \diamond \phi(x^{-1}) = \phi(x * x^{-1}) = \phi(1) = 1$, and likewise $\phi(x^{-1}) \diamond \phi(x) = 1$. So $\phi(x^{-1}) = \phi(x)^{-1}$. Likewise in (a), we can get $\phi(x^n)=\phi(x)^n$.

## P40 T10

Fill in the details of the proof that the symmetric groups $S_\Delta$ and $S_\Omega$ are isomorphic if $|\Delta|=|\Omega|$ as follows: let $\theta : \Delta \rightarrow \Omega$ be a bijection. Define $\phi : S_\Delta \rightarrow S_\Omega$ by $\phi(\sigma) = \theta \circ \sigma \circ \theta^{-1}$ and prove the following:

a. $\phi$ is well defined, that is, if $\sigma$ is a permutation of $\Delta$ then $\theta \circ \sigma \circ \theta^{-1}$ is a permutation of $\Omega$.

b. $\phi$ is a bijection from $S_\Delta$ onto $S_\Omega$.

c. $\phi$ is a homomorphism, that is, $\phi(\sigma \circ \tau) = \phi(\sigma) \circ \phi(\tau)$.

---

a. Obviously there exists $\sigma^{-1}$ that $\sigma \circ \sigma^{-1} = \sigma^{-1} \circ \sigma = I$. Easy to see $(\theta \circ \sigma \circ \theta^{-1})^{-1} = \theta \circ \sigma^{-1} \circ \theta^{-1}$. So $\theta \circ \sigma \circ \theta^{-1}$ is a permutation.

b. Easy to see $\phi^{-1} : S_\Omega \rarr S_\Delta$ that $\phi^{-1}(\tau) = \theta^{-1} \circ \tau \circ \theta$.

c. $\phi(\sigma \circ \tau) = \theta \circ \sigma \circ \tau \circ \theta^{-1} = \theta \circ \sigma \circ \theta^{-1} \circ \theta \circ \tau \circ \theta^{-1} = \phi(\sigma) \circ \phi(\tau)$.

## P40 T12

Let $A$, $B$, and $C$ be groups and let $G = A \times B$ and $H = B \times C$. Prove that $G \times C \cong A \times H$.

---

Let $\phi : (A \times B) \times C \rarr A \times (B \times C)$ that $\phi((a, b), c) = (a, (b, c))$. Obviously $\phi^{-1}(a, (b, c)) = ((a, b), c)$.

We have $\phi((a_1, b_1), c_1) \diamond \phi((a_2, b_2), c_2) = (a_1, (b_1, c_1)) \diamond (a_2, (b_2, c_2)) = (a_1 \diamond a_2, (b_1 \diamond b_2, c_1 \diamond c_2)) = \phi(((a_1, b_1), c_1) * ((a_2, b_2), c_2))$.

## P41 T25

Let $n \in \Z^+$. let $r$ and $s$ be the usual generators of $D_{2n}$ and let $\theta = 2\pi / n$.

a. Prove that the matrix $\left[\begin{matrix}\cos \theta & -\sin \theta \\ \sin \theta & \cos \theta\end{matrix}\right]$ is the matrix of the linear transformation which rotates the $x, y$ plane about the origin in a counterclockwise direction by $\theta$ radians.

b. Prove that the map $\phi : D_{2n} \rightarrow GL_2(\R)$ defined on generators by $\phi(r) = \left[\begin{matrix}\cos \theta & -\sin \theta \\ \sin \theta & \cos \theta\end{matrix}\right]$ and $\phi(s) = \left[\begin{matrix}0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0\end{matrix}\right]$ extends to a homomorphism of $D_{2n}$ into $GL_2(\R)$.

c. Prove that the homomorphism $\phi$ in part (b) is injective.

---

a. Since $(1, 0)$ rotate into $(\cos \theta, \sin \theta)$, $(0, 1)$ rotate into $(-\sin \theta, \cos \theta)$, so the matrix is rotate $\theta$.

b. We only need to verify $\phi(r)^n = \phi(s)^2 = I$, $\phi(s) \phi(r) = \phi(r)^{-1} \phi(s)$, then $\phi$ is well defined. All of them are easy to check using angle addition formulas. Since $\phi$ is generated by generators, then $\phi$ is homomorphism.

c. Since $\det(\phi(r)) = 1$, $\det(\phi(s)) = -1$, so $\phi(r^i) \ne \phi(sr^j)$. Since $\phi(r)^m = \left[\begin{matrix}\cos m\theta & -\sin m\theta \\ \sin m\theta & \cos m\theta\end{matrix}\right]$, so $\phi(r)^m = I$ iff $m=kn$. So $\phi(r^i) \ne \phi(r^j) (0 \le i, j < n, i \ne j)$. Thus $\phi$ is injective.

## P44 T6

Prove that a group $G$ acts faithfully on a set $A$ if and only if the kernel of the action is the set consisting only of the identity.

---

If: For all $g_1 \ne g_2$, $\sigma_{g_1} \circ (\sigma_{g_2})^{-1} = \sigma_{g_1} \circ \sigma_{g_2^{-1}} = \sigma_{g_1 * g_2^{-1}}$. Since $g_1 * g_2^{-1} \ne g_2 * g_2^{-1} = 1$, so $g_1 * g_2^{-1} \notin \ker$. So $\sigma_{g_1} \circ (\sigma_{g_2})^{-1} = \sigma_{g_1 * g_2^{-1}} \ne \sigma_1$, so $\sigma_{g_1} \ne \sigma_{g_2}$.

Only if: If $\sigma_g \in \ker$, $g \ne 1$, then the action is not faithful since $g \ne 1$, $\sigma_g = \sigma_1$.

## P48 T5

Prove that $G$ cannot have a subgroup $H$ with $|H| = n - 1$, where $n = |G| > 2$.

---

If $|H| = |G| - 1$, and $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, then $H = G \setminus \{g\}$. Since $|H| > 1$, then we can have $h \in H$, then $h^{-1} \in H$, thus $1 \in H$.

If $g^{-1} \in H$, then $g \in H$, contradiction. So $g^{-1} \notin H$, thus $g = g^{-1}$.

Since $|G| > 2$, we can find $g'$ that $g' \in G$, $g' \ne 1$, $g' \ne g = g^{-1}$. So $g' \in H$, $g'^{-1} \in H$, $g' * g \in G$. Since $g' \ne 1$, $g' * g \ne g$, so $g' * g \in H$.

Since $g'^{-1} \in H$, $g' * g \in H$, then $g = g'^{-1} * (g' * g) \in H$, contradiction.

## P52 T2

Prove that $C_G(Z(G)) = G$ and deduce that $N_G(Z(G)) = G$.

---

For all $g \in G$, $a \in Z(G)$, we have $aga^{-1} = g$. Mul $ag^{-1}$ on right, we have $gag^{-1} = a$. So $C_G(Z(G))=G$.

Since $G = C_G(Z(G)) \le N_G(Z(G)) \le G$, then $N_G(Z(G))=G$.

## P53 T12

Let $R$ be poly with integer coefficients on $x_1, x_2, x_3, x_4$. Each $\sigma \in S_4$ can be extended to a map from $R$ to $R$.

a. Let $p = 12x_1^5x_2^7x_4 - 18x_2^3x_3 + 11x_1^6x_2x_3^3x_4^{23}$, let $\sigma = (1, 2, 3, 4)$ and let $\tau = (1, 2, 3)$. Compute $\sigma \cdot p$, $\tau \cdot (\sigma \cdot p)$, $(\tau \circ \sigma) \cdot p$, and $(\sigma \circ \tau) \cdot p$.

b. Prove that these definitions give a (left) group action of $S_4$ on $R$.

c. Exhibit all permutations in $S_4$ that stabilize $x_4$ and prove that they form a subgroup isomorphic to $S_3$.

d. Exhibit all permutations in $S_4$ that stabilize the element $x_1+x_2$ and prove that they form an abelian subgroup of order 4.

e. Exhibit all permutations in $S_4$ that stabilize the element $x_1x_2 + x_3x_4$ and prove that they form a subgroup isomorphic to the dihedral group of order 8.

f. Show that the permutations in $S_4$ that stabilize the element $(x_1+x_2)(x_3+x_4)$ are exactly the same as those found in part (e).

---

a. $\sigma \cdot p = 12x_1x_2^5x_3^7 - 18x_3^3x_4 + 11x_1^{23}x_2^6x_3x_4^3$.

$\tau \cdot (\sigma \cdot p) = 12x_1^7x_2x_3^5 - 18x_1^3x_4 + 11x_1x_2^{23}x_3^6x_4^3$.

$(\tau \circ \sigma) \cdot p = 12x_1x_3^5x_4^7 - 18x_2x_4^3 + 11x_1^{23}x_2^3x_3^6x_4$.

$(\sigma \circ \tau) \cdot p = 12x_1^7x_2x_3^5 - 18x_1^3x_4 + 11x_1x_2^{23}x_3^6x_4^3$.

b. Obviously $1$ will do nothing on $p \in R$. We have $\sigma \cdot (\tau \cdot p(x_1, x_2, x_3, x_4)) = p(x_{\sigma(\tau(1))}, \cdots, x_{\sigma(\tau(4))}) = (\sigma \circ \tau) \cdot p$.

c. Obviously every element in $S_3$ add a ring $(4)$ is exactly $S_4$ stabilize $x_4$. Obviously $\phi(\sigma)(x_i) = x_{\sigma(i)}$ is a isomorphism from $S_4$ stabilize $x_4$ to $S_3$.

d. $I$; $(1, 2)$; $(3, 4)$; $(1, 2) (3, 4)$. Let $S'$ contains the 4 element, obviously $S'=\langle (1, 2), (3, 4) \rangle$, and $(1, 2)$ and $(3, 4)$ commute.

e. $I$; $(1, 2)$; $(3, 4)$; $(1, 2) (3, 4)$; $(1, 3) (2, 4)$; $(1, 4) (2, 3)$; $(1, 3, 2, 4)$; $(1, 4, 2, 3)$. We can let $\phi(r) = (1, 3, 2, 4)$, $\phi(s) = (1, 2)$, then easy to verify $\phi$ is an isomorphism from $D_8$ to the group. (In fact, you can consider a square $x_1x_3x_2x_4$, and take diagonal $x_3x_4$.)

f. Easy to verify that only permutation in e. can keep $(x_1+x_2)(x_3+x_4)$ unchanged. So the group in e. is same as the group in f.

## P61 T24

Let $G$ be a finite group and let $x \in G$.

a. Prove that if $g \in N_G(\langle x \rangle)$ then $gxg^{-1} = x^a$ for some $a \in \Z$.

b. Prove conversely that if $gxg^{-1} = x^a$ for some $a \in \Z$ then $g \in N_G(\langle x \rangle)$.

---

a. We have $g \langle x \rangle g^{-1} = \langle x \rangle$, since $x \in \langle x \rangle$, then $gxg^{-1} \in \langle x \rangle$, thus $gxg^{-1} = x^a$.

b. We need to prove $g \langle x \rangle g^{-1} = \langle x \rangle$. Since $G$ is finite, let $n=|x| \in \N$.

For all $x^i$, we have $gx^ig^{-1} = (gxg^{-1})^i = x^{ai} \in \langle x \rangle$. So $g \langle x \rangle g^{-1} \subseteq \langle x \rangle$.

For all $0 \le i, j < n$, $i \ne j$, if $gx^ig^{-1}=gx^jg^{-1}$, then $x^{(i-j) \bmod n}=1$. Since $i \ne j$, $0 < (i-j) \bmod n < n$, contradiction. So $|g \langle x \rangle g^{-1}| = n = |\langle x \rangle|$.

Thus $g \langle x \rangle g^{-1} = \langle x \rangle$.

## P65 T3

Prove that if $H$ is an abelian subgroup of a group $G$ then $\langle H, Z(G) \rangle$ is abelian. Give an explicit example of an abelian subgroup $H$ of a group $G$ such that $\langle H, C_G(H) \rangle$ is not abelian. 

---

For all $x, y \in H \cup Z(G)$, we prove $xy=yx$. If $x \in Z(G)$, then $xyx^{-1}=y$, thus $xy=yx$. Likewise, if $y \in Z(G)$, $xy=yx$.

Otherwise, $x, y \in H$, since $H$ is abelian, then $xy=yx$.

So $\langle H, Z(G) \rangle$ is abelian.

When $G=S_3$, $H=1$, then $C_G(H)=S_3$, but $\langle 1, S_3 \rangle = S_3$ is not abelian.

## P66 T18

Let $p$ be a prime and let $Z = \{z \in \Complex \mid z^{p^n} = 1 \text{ for some } n \in \Z^+\}$ (so $Z$ is the multiplicative group of all $p$-power roots of unity in $\Complex$). For each $k \ge 0$ let $H_k = \{z \in Z \mid z^{p^k} = 1\}$ (the group of $p^k$th roots of unity). Prove the following:

a. $H_k \le H_m$ if and only if $k \le m$.

b. $H_k$ is cyclic for all $k$ (assume that for any $n \in \Z^+$, $\{e^{2\pi i t/n} \mid t = 0, 1, \cdots, n - 1\}$ is the set of all $n$th roots of 1 in $\Complex$).

c. Every proper subgroup of $Z$ equals $H_k$ for some $k \ge 0$ (in particular, every proper subgroup of $Z$ is finite and cyclic).

d. Z is not finitely generated.

---

a. If: For all $k$, we have $1 \in H_k$, so $H_k \ne \varnothing$. For all $g \in H_k$, we have $g^{p^m}=(g^{p^k})^{p^{m-k}} = 1$. So $H_k \subseteq H_m$. For all $x, y \in H_k$, we have $(xy^{-1})^{p^k} = x^{p^k}(y^{p^k})^{-1} = 1$.

Only if: If $m < k$, then $e^{2\pi it/p^k} \notin H_m$, $e^{2\pi it/p^k} \in H_k$, contradiction.

b. Easy to see for all $0 \le t < n$, $H_k=\langle e^{2\pi it/p^k} \rangle$, since all roots of $1$ in $\Complex$ is given in statement.

c. Let $Z'$ be a proper subgroup for $Z$.

If $|Z'|$ is finite, then for all $g \in Z'$, $|g|$ is finite, and we can have $g \in Z'$ that has max order $n$. Since $g^{p^i}=1$ for some $i \in \Z^+$, then $n \mid p^i$ and $n=p^k$.

Since $|g|=p^k$, then we have distinct $g^i \space (i=0, 1, \cdots, p^k-1)$ all satisfy $(g^i)^{p^k}=(g^{p^k})^i=1$. Since $|H_k|=p^k=|g|$, then $H_k \subseteq Z'$.

If $g' \in Z'$, $g' \notin H_k$, then $|g'|=p^m$ and $m>k$ (otherwise $m \le k$, $g' \in H_k$), so $|g'|>|g|$, contradiction. So $Z'=H_k$.

Otherswise, $|Z'|$ is infinite. For all $g \in Z$, we have $g^{p^k}=1$ for some $k$, then we can have $g' \in Z'$, $g' \notin H_k$ (otherwise $Z' \subseteq H_k$ is finite). So $|g'|=m>k$.

Then $g \in H_k \subseteq H_m = \langle g' \rangle \subseteq Z'$. So $Z \subseteq Z'$, contradiction.

d. If $Z=\langle g_1, g_2, \cdots, g_n \rangle$, then let $m \in \N$ be the max order in $g_i$, easy to see $g_i \in H_m \subset H_{m+1} \subseteq Z$, so $\langle g_1, g_2, \cdots, g_n \rangle \subset Z$, contradiction.
