# Week1 Homework

By Deng Yufan.

## P21 T5

Prove for all $n > 1$ that $\Z / n \Z$ is not a group under multiplication of residue classes.

---

Obviously 1 is identity. And easy to see $0 * x = 0$ for all $x \in \Z/n\Z$, so 0 have no inverse. Thus $\Z/n\Z$ is not group under multiplication.

## P21 T7

Let $G = \{x \in \R \mid 0 \le x < 1\}$ and for $x, y \in G$ let $x * y$ be the fractional part of $x + y$. Prove that $*$ is a well defined binary operation on $G$ and that $G$ is an abelian group under $*$ (called the real numbers mod 1).

---

Well defined: Obviously to see fractional part of arbitrary $x \in \R$ satisfy $0 \le x < 1$. So $x * y \in G$, thus * is well defined.

Abelian group: We have $0 \in G$ to be identity, and inverse for 0 is 0, inverse for $x \ne 0$ is $1-x$.

And $x * (y * z) = x * ((y+z) - \lfloor y+z \rfloor) = (x+y+z-\lfloor y+z \rfloor) - \lfloor x+y+z-\lfloor y+z \rfloor \rfloor = (x+y+z) - \lfloor x+y+z \rfloor$. Likewise, $(x * y) * z = (x+y+z)-\lfloor x+y+z \rfloor = x * (y * z)$. So $(G, *)$ is a group.

We have $x*y = (x+y)-\lfloor x+y \rfloor = (y+x)-\lfloor y+x \rfloor = y*x$. So $(G, *)$ is abelian group.

## P22 T20

For $x$ an element in $G$ show that $x$ and $x^{-1}$ have the same order.

---

Let $y=x^{-1}$.

First consider order of $x$ exists. Let order of $x$ is $n \in \N$.

Easy to see $x^n * y^n = x^{n-1} * (x * y) * y^{n-1} = x^{n-1} * y^{n-1} = \cdots = 1$. Likewise, $y^n * x^n = 1$. So $y^n$ is inverse of $x^n=1$, or say $y^n = 1$.

If for $m \in \N$ and $m < n$, $y^m=1$, so $x^{n-m} = x^n * y^m = 1$, contradiction. So order of $y$ is $n$.

Then if order of $x$ not exists. If order of $y$ exists, and $y^m = 1$. Easy to see $x^m * y^m = y^m * x^m = 1$, so $x^m = 1$, contradiction.

## P23 T29

Prove that $A \times B$ is an abelian group if and only if both $A$ and $B$ are abelian.

---

If: For all $a_1, a_2 \in A$, $b_1, b_2 \in B$, we have $(a_1, b_1) * (a_2, b_2) = (a_1 *_A a_2, b_1 *_B b_2) = (a_2 *_A a_1, b_2 *_B b_1) = (a_2, b_2) * (a_1, b_1)$.

Only if: We can assume $A$ is not abelian, then we can have $a_1, a_2 \in A$, $a_1 *_A a_2 \ne a_2 *_A a_1$. Then for all $b_1, b_2 \in B$, $(a_1, b_1) * (a_2, b_2) = (a_1 *_A a_2, b_1 *_B b_2) \ne (a_2 *_A a_1, b_2 *_B b_1) = (a_2, b_2) * (a_1, b_1)$.

## P23 T31

Prove that any finite group $G$ of even order contains an element of order 2. [Let $t(G)$ be the set $\{g \in G \mid g \ne g^{-1}\}$. Show that $t(G)$ has an even number of elements and every nonidentity element of $G-t(G)$ has order 2.]

---

For all $g \in t(G)$, we have $g^{-1} \ne (g^{-1})^{-1} = g$, so $g^{-1} \in t(G)$. Consider $R=\{(g, g) \mid g \in t(G)\} \cup \{(g, g^{-1}) \mid g \in t(G)\}$, easy to see $R$ is an equivlence relation on $t(G)$. And every equivlent class of $t(G)$ under $R$ is in form of $\{g, g^{-1}\}$, which have order of 2. So $|t(G)|$ is even.

For all $g \in G-t(G)$, we have $g=g^{-1}$. So $g * g = g * g^{-1} = 1$. But $g \ne 1$, so order of $g$ is 2.

## P23 T33

Let $x$ be an element of finite order $n$ in $G$.

a. Prove that if $n$ is odd then $x^i \ne x^{-i}$ for all $i = 1, 2, \cdots, n - 1$.

b. Prove that if $n = 2k$ and $1 \le i < n$ then $x^i = x^{-i}$ if and only if $i = k$.

---

Lemma. For any $x \in G$, If $x^n=x^m=1$ for $n, m \in \Z^+$, then $x^{\gcd(n, m)}=1$.

If $n=m$, it's trivial. So we can assume $n > m$. Let $y=x^{-1}$, since $x^n=x^m$, we have $x^ny^m=x^my^m$, thus $x^{n-m}=1$. So we have $x^{n-m}=x^m=1$, and we can do the process repeatly. Easy to see exponential of $x$ follows Euclidean algorithm. Then the lemma is proven.

a. If for $1 \le m < n$, $x^m=x^{-m}$, then obviously $x^{2m}=1$. We have $\gcd(n, 2m)=\gcd(n, m)$ since $2 \nmid n$, so $x^{\gcd(n, m)}=1$, thus $x^m=1$, which is contradict to $n$ is order of $x$.

b. If: Obviously $x^{2k}=x^n=1$ deduce that $x^k=x^{-k}$.

Only if: Obviously $x^i=x^{-i}$ deduce that $x^{2i}=1$. Since $x$ has order $2k$, so $k \le i < 2k$. And $x^{2\gcd(i, k)}=x^{\gcd(2i, 2k)}=1$, so $\gcd(i, k) = k$, thus $i=k$.

## P27 T3

Use the generators and relations above to show that every element of $D_{2n}$ which is not a power of $r$ has order 2. Deduce that $D_{2n}$ is generated by the two elements $s$ and $sr$, both of which have order 2.

---

Since $s^2=1$, so $s=s^{-1}$. Thus every element in $D_{2n}=\langle r, s \rangle$ has form of $r^{a_1}sr^{a_2}s \cdots sr^{a_k}$. Since $r^{2n}=1$, thus $0 \le a_i < 2n$. Since $sr=r^{-1}s$, thus $r^{a_1}sr^{a_2}s \cdots sr^{a_k} = r^{a_1-a_2+\cdots+(-1)^{k+1}a_k}s^{k-1}$. So every element in $D_{2n}$ has form of $r^m$ or $r^ms$.

So every element in $D_{2n}$ that is not a power of $r$ has form $r^ms \ne 1$. We have $(r^ms)^2 = r^msr^ms = r^m(r^{-1})^ms^2 = 1$. So $r^ms$ has order 2.

Since $s$ and $sr$ can generate $s = s$ and $r = s * (sr)$, so $s$ and $sr$ can generate $D_{2n}$, and have order 2 which has proven.

## P28 T16

Show that the group $\langle x_1, y_1 \mid x_1^2 = y_1^2 = (x_1y_1)^2 = 1 \rangle$ is the dihedral group $D_4$ (where $x_1$ may be replaced by the letter $r$ and $y_1$ by $s$).

---

We have $D_4 = \langle r, s \mid r^2 = s^2 = 1, sr=r^{-1}s \rangle$. We claim that $sr=r^{-1}s \Leftrightarrow (rs)^2=1$ when $r^2=s^2=1$.

$\Rightarrow$: Mul $r$ on left, $s$ on right, we have $rsrs=rr^{-1}ss$, so $(rs)^2=1$.

$\Leftarrow$: Mul $r^{-1}$ on left, $s^{-1}$ on right, we have $r^{-1}(rs)^2s^{-1}=r^{-1}s^{-1}$, so $sr=r^{-1}s$.

So $D_4 = \langle r, s \mid r^2 = s^2 = (rs)^2 = 1 \rangle = \langle x_1, y_1 \mid x_1^2 = y_1^2 = (x_1y_1)^2 = 1 \rangle$.
