# Week3 Homework (Textbook)

By Deng Yufan.

## P53 T1

a. The zero vector space has no basis.

b. Every vector space that is generated by a finite set has a basis.

c. Every vector space has a finite basis.

d. A vector space cannot have more than one basis.

e. If a vector space has a finite basis, then the number of vectors in
every basis is the same.

f. The dimension of $P_n(F)$ is $n$.

g. The dimension of $M_{m \times n}(F)$ is $m + n$.

h. Suppose that $V$ is a finite-dimensional vector space, that $S_1$ is a linearly independent subset of $V$, and that $S_2$ is a subset of $V$ that generates $V$. Then $S_1$ cannot contain more vectors than $S_2$.

i. If $S$ generates the vector space $V$, then every vector in $V$ can be written as a linear combination of vectors in $S$ in only one way.

j. Every subspace of a finite-dimensional space is finite-dimensional.

k. If $V$ is a vector space having dimension $n$, then $V$ has exactly one subspace with dimension 0 and exactly one subspace with dimension $n$.

l. If $V$ is a vector space having dimension $n$, and if $S$ is a subset of $V$ with $n$ vectors, then $S$ is linearly independent if and only if $S$ spans $V$.

a. False. b. True. c. False. d. False. e. True. f. False. g. False. h. True. i. False. j. True. k. True. l. True.

## P55 T8

Let $W$ denote the subspace of $R^5$ consisting of all the vectors having coordinates that sum to zero. The vectors
$$
\begin{aligned}
& u_1 = (2, −3, 4, −5, 2), u_2 = (−6, 9, −12, 15, −6),
\\
& u_3 = (3, −2, 7, −9, 1), u_4 = (2, −8, 2, −2, 6),
\\
& u_5 = (−1, 1, 2, 1, −3), u_6 = (0, −3, −18, 9, 12),
\\
& u_7 = (1, 0, −2, 3, −2), u_8 = (2, −1, 1, −9, 7)
\end{aligned}
$$
generate $W$. Find a subset of the set $\{u_1, u_2,\cdots,u_8\}$ that is a basis for $W$.

---

Let $S$ be the the current set. First we have $S=\{u_1\}$.

We have $u_2=-3u_1$, so $S$ stays the same.

We have $u_3 \notin \text{span}(S)$, so $S$ become $\{u_1, u_3\}$.

We have $u_4=4u_1-2u_3$, so $S$ stays the same.

We have $u_5 \notin \text{span}(S)$, so $S$ become $\{u_1, u_3, u_5\}$.

We have $u_6=u_1-2u_3-4u_5$, so $S$ stays the same.

We have $u_7 \notin \text{span}(S)$, so $S$ become $\{u_1, u_3, u_5, u_7\}$.

We have $u_8=-u_1+u_3-2u_5-u_7$, so $S$ stays the same.

In the end, $\{u_1, u_3, u_5, u_7\}$ is a basis of $W$.

## P55 T11

Let $u$ and $v$ be distinct vectors of a vector space $V$. Show that if $\{u, v\}$ is a basis for $V$ and $a$ and $b$ are nonzero scalars, then both $S_1=\{u + v, au\}$ and $S_2=\{au, bv\}$ are also bases for $V$.

---

We have $x(u+v)+yau=0 \Leftrightarrow (x+ya)u+xv=0 \Leftrightarrow x+ya=0 \land x=0 \Leftarrow x=y=0$. Similarly, we have $xau+ybv=0 \Leftrightarrow xa=0 \land yb=0 \Leftrightarrow x=y=0$. So $S_1$ and $S_2$ is independent.

We have $u=0(u+v)+\frac{1}{a}(au)$, $v=(u+v)-\frac{1}{a}(au)$, so $S_1$ spans $V$. Similarly, $u=\frac{1}{a}(au)$, $v=\frac{1}{b}(bv)$, so $S_2$ spans $V$. So $S_1$ and $S_2$ are bases of $V$.

## P56 T23

Let $v_1, v_2,\cdots,v_k, v$ be vectors in a vector space $V$, and define $W_1 = \text{span}(\{v_1, v_2,\cdots,v_k\})$, and $W_2 = \text{span}(\{v_1, v_2,\cdots,v_k, v\})$.

a. Find necessary and sufficient conditions on $v$ such that $\dim(W_1) = \dim(W_2)$.

b. State and prove a relationship involving $\dim(W_1)$ and $\dim(W_2)$ in the case that $\dim(W_1) \ne \dim(W_2)$.

---

a. $\dim(W_1)=\dim(W_2) \Leftrightarrow v \in \text{span}(\{v_1, v_2, \cdots, v_k\})$.

We know that $W_1$ is a subspace of $W_2$, and $\dim(W_1)=\dim(W_2)$, so $W_1=W_2$. Thus $v \in \text{span}(\{v_1, v_2, \cdots, v_k\})$.

If $v \in \text{span}(\{v_1, v_2, \cdots, v_k\})$, then $W_1=W_2$, thus $\dim(W_1)=\dim(W_2)$.

b. $\dim(W_1)+1=\dim(W_2)$.

Let $\beta$ be a basis of $W_1$, then $\text{span}(\beta \cup \{v\})=W_2$. And we have $\dim(W_1) \ne \dim(W_2)$, so $v \notin \text{span}(\beta)$, so $\beta \cup \{v\}$ is a basis of $W_2$. So $\dim(W_1)+1=\dim(W_2)$.

## P57 T29

a. Prove that if $W_1$ and $W_2$ are finite-dimensional subspaces of a vector space $V$, then the subspace $W_1 + W_2$ is finite-dimensional, and $\dim(W_1 + W_2) = \dim(W_1) + \dim(W_2) − \dim(W_1 \cap W_2)$. 

b. Let $W_1$ and $W_2$ be finite-dimensional subspaces of a vector space $V$, and let $V = W_1 + W_2$. Deduce that $V$ is the direct sum of $W_1$ and $W_2$ if and only if $\dim(V) = \dim(W_1) + \dim(W_2)$.

---

a. Let $\gamma$ be a basis of $W_1 \cap W_2$. Since $\gamma$ is independent, and $\text{span}(\gamma) \subseteq W_1$, $\text{span}(\gamma) \subseteq W_2$. So there is $\alpha$ and $\beta$ that $\gamma \cap \alpha = \varnothing$, $\gamma \cup \alpha$ is a basis of $W_1$; $\gamma \cap \beta = \varnothing$, $\gamma \cup \beta$ is a basis of $W_2$. Since $\alpha \cap (W_1 \cap W_2) = \alpha \cap \text{span}(\gamma) = \varnothing$, so $\alpha \cap W_2 = \varnothing$, similarly $\beta \cap W_1 = \varnothing$, so $\alpha \cap \beta = \varnothing$. So we can proof $\gamma \cup \alpha \cup \beta$ is a basis of $W_1 \cup W_2$ instead of proving the lemma.

Since $\text{span}(\gamma \cup \alpha) = W_1$, $\text{span}(\gamma \cup \beta) = W_2$, so $\text{span}(\gamma \cup \alpha \cup \beta) = W_1+W_2$. Since $\text{span}(\gamma \cup \alpha) = W_1$, $\beta \cap W_1 = \varnothing$, so $\text{span}(\gamma \cup \alpha) \cap \text{span}(\beta) = \{0\}$. So $\gamma \cup \alpha \cup \beta$ is independent. Thus $\gamma \cup \alpha \cup \beta$ is a basis of $W_1 \cup W_2$.

b. If every vector in $V$ has only one way to represent as $w_1+w_2$ where $w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2$, then $0$ has only one way to represent as $w_1+w_2$ where $w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2$. If $0$ has only one way to represent as $w_1+w_2$ where $w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2$, then every vector in $V$ has only one way to represent as $w_1+w_2$ where $w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2$ (otherwise we have $0=w_1+w_2$ and $0=(w_1+w_{1, 1}-w_{2, 1})+(w_2+w_{1, 2}-w_{2, 2})$).

If $W_1 \cap W_2 = \{0\}$, then $0$ has only one way to represent as $w_1+w_2$ where $w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2$, which is $0+0$ (otherwise we have $0=w_1+w_2$, so $w_2=-w_1$, $w_2 \in W_1$, $w_2 \notin W_2$). If $0$ has only one way to represent as $w_1+w_2$ where $w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2$, then $W_1 \cap W_2 = \{0\}$ (otherwise we have $0 \ne w \in W_1 \cap W_2$, $0=w+(-w)$).

So $V$ is the direct sum of $W_1$ and $W_2$ iff $0$ has only one way to represent as $w_1+w_2$ where $w_1 \in W_1, w_2 \in W_2$ iff $W_1 \cap W_2 = \{0\}$. We have $\dim(W)=0$ iff $W=\{0\}$, so the lemma is proven.

## P74 T1

a. If $T$ is linear, then $T$ preserves sums and scalar products.

b. If $T(x + y) = T(x) + T(y)$, then $T$ is linear.

c. $T$ is one-to-one if and only if the only vector $x$ such that $T(x) = 0$ is $x = 0$.

d. If $T$ is linear, then $T(0_V)$ = $0_W$.

e. If $T$ is linear, then $\text{nullity}(T) + \text{rank}(T) = \dim(W)$.

f. If $T$ is linear, then $T$ carries linearly independent subsets of $V$ onto linearly independent subsets of $W$.

g. If $T,U: V \rightarrow W$ are both linear and agree on a basis for $V$, then
$T = U$.

h. Given $x_1, x_2 \in V$ and $y_1, y_2 \in W$, there exists a linear transformation $T: V \rightarrow W$ such that $T(x_1) = y_1$ and $T(x_2) = y_2$.

a. True. b. False. c. True. d. True. e. False. f. False. g. True. h. False.

## P74 T2, 5, 6

Prove that $T$ is a linear transformation, and find bases for both $N(T)$ and $R(T)$. Then compute the nullity and rank of $T$, and verify the dimension theorem. Finally, use the appropriate theorems in this section to determine whether $T$ is one-to-one or onto.

2\. $T: R^3 \rightarrow R^2$ defined by $T(a_1, a_2, a_3)=(a_1 − a_2, 2a_3)$.

5\. $T: P_2(R) \rightarrow P_3(R)$ defined by $T(f(x)) = xf(x) + f'
(x)$.

6\. $T: M_{n \times n}(F) \rightarrow F$ defined by $T(A) = \text{tr}(A)$.

---

2\. $T(a_1, a_2, a_3)+T(b_1, b_2, b_3)=(a_1-a_2, 2a_3)+(b_1-b_2, 2b_3)=((a_1+b_1)-(a_2+b_2), 2(a_3+b_3))=T(a_1+b_1, a_2+b_2, a_3+b_3)$.

$cT(a_1, a_2, a_3)=c(a_1-a_2,2a_3)=(ca_1-ca_2, 2ca_3)=T(ca_1, ca_2, ca_3)$.

So $T$ is a linear transformation. We have $\{(1, 1, 0)\}$ is a basis of $N(T)$, and $\{(1, 0), (0, 1)\}$ is a basis of $R(T)$. So $\text{nullity}(T)=1, \text{rank}(T)=2, \text{nullity}(T)+\text{rank}(T)=3=\dim(R^3)$. Since $\text{nullity}(T) \ne 0$, so $T$ is not one-to-one. Since $\text{rank}(T)=2=\dim(R^2)$, so $T$ is onto.

5\. $T(f)+T(g)=xf+f'+xg+g'=x(f+g)+(f+g)'=T(f+g)$.

$cT(f)=cxf+cf'=xcf+(cf)'=T(cf)$.

So $T$ is a linear transformation. We have $\varnothing$ is a basis of $N(T)$, and $\{f_0(x)=1+x^2, f_1(x)=x, f_2(x)=2x+x^3\}$ is a basis of $R(T)$. So $\text{nullity}(T)=0, \text{rank}(T)=4, \text{nullity}(T)+\text{rank}(T)=3=\dim(P_2(R))$. Since $\text{nullity}(T) = 0$, so $T$ is one-to-one. Since $\text{rank}(T)=3 \ne \dim(P_3(R))$, so $T$ is not onto.

6\. $T(A)+T(B)=\sum_{i=1}^nA_{i, i}+\sum_{i=1}^nB_{i, i}=\sum_{i=1}^n(A_{i, i}+B_{i, i})=T(A+B)$.

$cT(A)=c\sum_{i=1}^nA_{i, i}=\sum_{i=1}^ncA_{i, i}=T(cA)$.

So $T$ is a linear transformation. We have $\{A^i=\{A^i_{i, i}=1, A^1_{n, n}=-1\} | 1 \le i \le n-1\} \cup \{A^{i, j}=\{A^{i, j}_{i, j}=1\} | 1 \le i, j \le n, i \ne j\}$ is a basis of $N(T)$, and $\{1\}$ is a basis of $R(T)$. So $\text{nullity}(T)=n^2-1, \text{rank}(T)=1, \text{nullity}(T)+\text{rank}(T)=n^2=\dim(M_{n \times n}(F))$. Since $\text{nullity}(T) \ne 0$, so $T$ is not one-to-one. Since $\text{rank}(T)=1= \dim(F)$, so $T$ is onto.

## P75 T9

State why $T$ is not linear.

a. $T(a_1, a_2) = (1, a_2)$.

b. $T(a_1, a_2)=(a_1, a_1^2)$.

---

a. $N(T)=\varnothing$, so $T$ is not linear.

b. $cT(a_1, a_2)=(ca_1, ca_1^2)$, but $T(ca_1, ca_2)=(ca_1, c^2a_1^2)$. So when $c \ne 1$, $cT(a_1, a_2) \ne T(ca_1, ca_2)$. So $T$ is not linear.

## P75 T11

Prove that there exists a linear transformation $T: R^2 \rightarrow R^3$ such that $T(1, 1) = (1, 0, 2)$ and $T(2, 3) = (1, −1, 4)$. What is $T(8, 11)$?

---

Since $\{(1, 1), (2, 3)\}$ is a basis of $R^2$, so there is only a linear transformation $T$ that $T(1, 1) = (1, 0, 2)$, $T(2, 3) = (1, −1, 4)$.

We have that $(8, 11)=2(1, 1)+3(2, 3)$, so $T(8, 11)=2T(1, 1)+3T(2, 3)=(2, 0, 4)+(3, -3, 12)=(5, -3, 16)$.

## P76 T16

Let $T: P(R) \rightarrow P(R)$ be defined by $T(f(x)) = f'(x)$. Recall that $T$ is linear. Prove that $T$ is onto, but not one-to-one.

---

For any polynomial $F(x)=a_0+a_1x+a_2x^2+\cdots+a_nx^n$, we have $G(x)=a_0x+\frac{1}{2}a_1x^2+\frac{1}{3}a_2x^3+\cdots+\frac{1}{n+1}a_nx^{n+1}$, that $G'(x)=F(x)$. So $T$ is onto.

Notice that $F(x)=0$ and $G(x)=1$, $T(F)=T(G)=F$. So $T$ is not one-to-one.

## P76 T17

Let $V$ and $W$ be finite-dimensional vector spaces and $T: V \rightarrow W$ be linear.

a. Prove that if $\dim(V) < \dim(W)$, then T cannot be onto.

b. Prove that if $\dim(V) > \dim(W)$, then T cannot be one-to-one.

---

a. We have $T$ is onto iff $\text{rank}(T)=\dim(W)$, and $\dim(V)=\text{nullity}(T)+\text{rank}(T)$, so $\text{rank}(T) \le \dim(V)$. So when $\dim(V)<\dim(W)$, we have $\text{rank}(T) \le \dim(V) < \dim(W)$, then $T$ is not onto.

b. We have $T$ is one-to-one iff $\text{nullity}(T)=0$, which is $\dim(V)=\text{rank}(T)$. We also have $\text{rank}(T) \le \dim(W)$. So when $\dim(V) > \dim(W) \ge \text{rank}(T)$, we have $\dim(V) > \text{rank}(T)$, then $T$ is not one-to-one.

## P77 T28, 29

Let $V$ be a vector space, and let $T: V \rightarrow V$ be linear. A subspace $W$ of $V$ is said to be $T$-invariant if $T(x) \in W$ for every $x \in W$, that is, $T(W) \subseteq W$. If $W$ is $T$-invariant, we define the restriction of $T$ on $W$ to be the function $T_W : W \rightarrow W$ defined by $T_W(x) = T(x)$ for all $x \in W$.

Assume that $W$ is a subspace of a vector space $V$ and that $T: V \rightarrow V$ is linear.

28\. Prove that the subspaces $\{0\}$, $V$, $R(T)$, and $N(T)$ are all $T$-invariant.

29\. If $W$ is $T$-invariant, prove that $T_W$ is linear.

---

28\. We have $T(0)=0$, so $\{0\}$ is $T$-invariant. According to the definition, Any $T(x)$ cannot be out of $V$ and $R(T)$, so they are $T$-invariant.

We have $N(T)$ is a subspace of $V$, so $0 \in N(T)$. And $T(N(T))=\{0\}$, so $N(T)$ is $T$-invariant.

29\. We have $T_W(x)+T_W(y)=T(x)+T(y)=T(x+y)$. Since $W$ is a subspace, $x+y \in W$. So $T(x+y)=T_W(x+y)$, that is $T_W(x)+T_W(y)=T_W(x+y)$.

We have $cT_W(x)=cT(x)=T(cx)$. Since $W$ is a subspace, $cx \in W$. So $T(cx)=T_W(cx)$, that is $cT_W(x)=T_W(cx)$.

## P78 T37

A function $T: V \rightarrow W$ between vector spaces $V$ and $W$ is called additive if $T(x + y) = T(x) + T(y)$ for all $x, y \in V$. Prove that if $V$ and $W$ are vector spaces over the field of rational numbers, then any additive function from $V$ into $W$ is a linear transformation.

---

That is to prove $T(x+y)=T(x)+T(y) \rightarrow T(cx)=cT(x)$.

We have $T(0)=T(0+0)=T(0)+T(0)$. So $T(0)=0$.

We have $T(0x)=T(0)=0=0T(x)$, and if $T(nx)=nT(x)$, then $T((n+1)x)=T(nx+x)=nT(x)+T(x)=(n+1)T(x)$. So for all natural numbers $T(nx)=nT(x)$.

For any non-negative rational number $\frac{m}{n} \space (m \in \N, n \in \N^*)$, we have $T(\frac{m}{n})=T(m \times \frac{1}{n})=mT(\frac{1}{n})$ and $T(1)=T(n \times \frac{1}{n})=nT(\frac{1}{n})$, that is $T(\frac{1}{n})=\frac{1}{n}T(1)$. So $T(\frac{m}{n})=mT(\frac{1}{n})=\frac{m}{n}T(1)$.

For any negative rational number $-x$, we have $T(x)+T(-x)=T(0)=0$, so $T(-x)=-T(x)=-xT(1)$. In conclusion, $T(x)=xT(1)$ for all rational numbers.

So $T(cx)=cxT(1)=cT(x)$.

## P79 T40

Let $V$ be a vector space and $W$ be a subspace of $V$. Define the mapping $\eta : V \rightarrow V/W$ by $\eta(v) = v + W$ for $v \in V$.

a. Prove that $\eta$ is a linear transformation from $V$ onto $V/W$ and that $N(\eta) = W$.

b. Suppose that $V$ is finite-dimensional. Use a. and the dimension theorem to derive a formula relating $\dim(V)$, $\dim(W)$, and $\dim(V/W)$.

---

a. We have $\eta(x)+\eta(y)=(x+W)+(y+W)=(x+y)+W=\eta(x+y)$. $c\eta(x)=c(x+W)=cx+W=\eta(cx)$. So $\eta$ is a linear transformation.

For all $v+W \in V/W \space (v \in V)$, we have $\eta(v)=v+W$, so $\eta$ is onto.

According to P23 T31, $v+W=0+W$ iff $v \in W$. So $N(\eta)=W$.

b. We assert $\dim(V)=\dim(W)+\dim(V/W)$.

Since $\text{nullity}(\eta)=\dim(W)$ proven in a., and $\eta$ is onto, so $\text{rank}(\eta)=\dim(V/W)$. So $\dim(V)=\text{nullity}(\eta)+\text{rank}(\eta)=\dim(W)+\dim(V/W)$.

## Extra

Let $a_1,a_2,\cdots,a_m \space (m \ge 2)$ be vectors in a vector space over $\R$. $a_m$ is not a zero vector.

Prove that for any real number $k_1,k_2,\cdots,k_{m-1}$, a set $S=\{\beta_1,\beta_2,\cdots,\beta_{m-1}\} \space (\beta_1=a_1+k_1 a_m,\beta_2=a_2+k_2 a_m,\cdots,\beta_{m-1}=a_{m-1}+k_{m-1} a_m)$ is linearly independent if and only if $\{a_1,a_2,\cdots,a_m\}$ is linearly independent.

---

1\. If $\{a_1,a_2,\cdots,a_m\}$ is dependent, then there is $0 \ne \vec c = [c_1, c_2, \cdots, c_m]$ that $\sum_{i=1}^m c_ia_i=0$. If $c_1=c_2=\cdots=c_{m-1}=0$, then $c_ma_m=0$. We have $a_m \ne 0$, so $c_m=0$, which is a contradiction. So $\exist 1 \le i < m, c_i \ne 0$. Call the smallest $i$ that $c_i \ne 0$ as $p$.

Notice that when $k_p=\frac{c_m}{c_p}$, $k_i = 0 \space (i \ne p)$, $\sum_{i=1}^{m-1} c_i \beta_i = \sum_{i=1}^{m-1}c_ia_i+c_pk_pa_m=\sum_{i=1}^m c_ia_i=0$. So $\beta_i$ is dependent.

2\. If there exists $w_1, w_2, \cdots, w_{m-1}$ that $S'=\{\alpha_1=a_1+w_1a_m, \alpha_2=a_2+w_2a_m, \cdots, \alpha_{m-1}=a_{m-1}+w_{m-1}a_m\}$ is dependent, then there is $0 \ne \vec c = [c_1, c_2, \cdots, c_{m-1}]$ that $\sum_{i=1}^{m-1}c_i(a_i+w_ia_m)=0$, so $\sum_{i=1}^{m-1}c_ia_i + (\sum_{i=1}^{m-1}c_iw_i)a_m=0$, $\{a_i\}$ is dependent.

So $\{a_i\}$ is independent iff for all $k_1, k_2, \cdots, k_{m-1}$, $S$ is independent.
